How to use command prompt to put a Windows computer to sleep
Are you missing the “Sleep” shortcut on your Windows computer? 
Here is an easy way to put your computer to “sleep” using the Command Prompt.

Especially for laptops, “Sleep” is a good standby mode when you are not using
 the system for quite some time. It saves battery and also keeps the system cool,
  while keeping it just enough active that whenever you hit a key, everything 
  comes back to life again. But, sometimes, the graphical menu option to put your 
  system to sleep may disappear and become hard to find.

Here is a quick fire and sure way to get your computer to sleep using the 
Command Prompt. Don’t worry, these set of commands are not rocket science 
and anyone who can point and click or copy/paste their way through Windows 
can easily do this.

Pre-requisites
Before you go ahead and especially if you are on a laptop (i.e., not a desktop PC), 
you need to turn off your computer’s “Hibernation” mode. Otherwise, when you use the 
command to put it to sleep, your laptop may go into “Hibernate”, which is not what
 you want.

Open an Administration Command Prompt. The simple way in any Windows Operating System 
is to hit the “WINDOWS” key once and start typing “CMD”. Right click on the 
“Command Prompt” item that is displayed and select “Run as Administrator”. 
Accept the elevation when prompted. Note that if you are using Windows 8 or above, 
you will need to be in the “Tiles” desktop and not the good old icons and start menu 
desktop for this to work. Anyway, once you have your administration Command Prompt, 
go ahead and run the below command (this will turn off the hibernation option,
 you can re-enable it again anytime):

Copy Code
* C:\> POWERCFG /HIBERNATE OFF
If you do a “ON” instead of the “OFF” in the command above, it will turn 
hibernation back ON.

NOTE: You do not need to repeat this command the next time unless you have
 turned hibernation back on in between.

Put It To Sleep Now
If you want to immediately sleep your system, still in the Administration 
Command Prompt, run this:

Copy Code
* C:\> RUNDLL32.EXE powrprof.dll,SetSuspendState 0,1,0
Remember not to add any extra spaces other than what is shown above 
(copy paste it if you need). Your system will go to sleep IMMEDIATELY on
 running the above command.

Set Up A Shortcut
To repeat the process any time, set up a shortcut on your desktop.

Right-click in any blank area of your desktop
Choose New > Shortcut
Copy/paste the above command (“RUNDLL ….. 0,1,0”)
Click Next
For the name of the shortcut, enter “Put to Sleep Immediately”
Click Finish
That’s it. Now anytime you need to, simply double click on this icon and your 
computer will instantly sleep.